art book suggestions
New postby peter cummings on Thu Aug 25, 2011 9:12 pm 
Art books. I'm after a few suggestions.
"The invisible dragon, essays on beauty" by Dave Hickey was recommended by someone here a while ago, can't remember who but many thanks. Heavy but timely as I investigated returning to study and looked for direction in my glass work. Helped me understand why I didn't want to go to Uni. and the hold they have over a largely institutionalised glass scene in Australia.
Leaves me looking at Tech colleges fine art, maybe, or just buying more books and equipment (a lathe is on its way at last) and travelling a bit to work with selected other people more. Pushing myself in my own direction.

BOOKS ? Suggestions welcome. 
In the same parcel came Ben Shahns Shape of content, which needs several readings but terrific, and makes me want more.
Using color, is a wanted, and design in B&W as printmakers use it. Character in figure drawing as opposed to photographic realism is a main interest. Abstract is not my thing though an understanding could be helpful.
As an engraver principally I guess my direction may be a bit away from some fusing, but I know there are many out there whose suggestions will be on the ball.
Specific artists to research is also another direction I'll head for.
Many thanks to all.
Peter.
peter cummings 
 
Posts: 939
Joined: Mon Jan 19, 2004 7:05 am
Location: hampton park,vic,australia
Top
Re: art book suggestions
New postby Cynthia O on Fri Aug 26, 2011 12:17 am 
I want to think about this for a little while, but what first came to mind after reading,
 
Using color, is a wanted, and design in B&W as printmakers use it. Character in figure drawing as opposed to photographic realism is a main interest. Abstract is not my thing though an understanding could be helpful."


I immediately thought of Robert Motherwell and Franz Kline. I like Motherwell better... He was a painter/printmaker. One of the early members of the American Abstract Expressionists. Lots of black and white, graphic, abstract, and a good body of work that makes beautiful use of space, composition, balance, rhythm... He'd be?or maybe the "New York School" of Abstract Expressionists would be a place to get some info and education about abstraction.

Regarding design stuff, and if you want a good design book, I am very fond of the book Design Basics by Lauer. I haven't found one yet that I think is better. You can find used copies that will be the same info as more current editions with a much better price.

I have a lovely and beautiful book by Maya Lin titled Boundaries. It's a book that outlines her thinking and the process of her work. It's valued by me because of how beautifully designed the book itself is, which also is descriptive of her attention to the importance of every aspect of detail in visual work?any work really, but she fully realizes every aspect of her work.

Okay. I'm going to ponder book suggestions. I have a plethora, but not all are worth a recommend.