 
 You've touched a real core issue of glass casting here, 
 and you need to realize the schedule you were introduced too 
 is not the end-all be-all. Its only a starting point.
  You've got to learn to recognize the variables and make 
  adjustments in your schedules. 
 I think you are comparing some open-faced casting work you've done 
 with this casting of a vessel form. Apples and orangutans (monkeys). 
 
 First, John Kurman did a great study and expanation 
 about how investment really dries out. Look that up in the archives, 
 its in the Casting section and he was the author. 
 A hold at 225 is almost worthless. Go read it. 
 
 Second, you have to take into consideration how thick the investment is. 
 The figures you gave of 100 dph to 225 soak for 2 etc. 
 are for a particular thickness of investment, probably 2" thick. 
 Even Fenton and Kervin note in their book that thicker investments 
 take longer to dry out and heat up properly. 
 
 
 What thickness of investment are you dealing with when you state 
 that your schedule "seems to work". 
 Become conscious of how thick the investment is.
  Don't apply some catch-all rule to every casting situation. 
 
 With this casting on this post I had a 6" thick solid investment 
 in the core of this form. 
 You can't compare a 2" thick investment with a 6" thick investment schedule. 
 Overall the investment thickness was 10 1/2". Its almost apples and oranges. 
 
 You're going up 500 dph with your casting from 350F to 1100F. 
 You got to be doing open-faced casting. 
 You can't compare that to casting a vessel form. 
 
 What's the advantage to a much slower ramp up? 
 
 #1 A 6" thick core of investment will only go up and down in temp about 40 dph.
  So I was slightly rushing it at 50 dph. 
  I've stuck thermocouples in the middle of thick blocks of investment 
  to find out how fast the temperture changed. 
  Kervin and Fenton have done similar work. 
  I have a whole chart worked out to tell me how 
  fast a certain thickness of investment can change in temperature. 
 
 #2 500 dph is a slumping or fusing rate. 
 A 1/2" thick investment will only move up or down about 200 dph. 
 So you're wasting your time going too much faster, 
 or you'll need really long holds. 
 The glass will not flow nice on investment that's not hot enough.
  
 I have a glass buddy who had some slumping experience, 
 so he knows everything. 
 He wanted to cast some small open faced but complex designs in investment. 
 He took the glass up 500 dph, but the glass didn't fill the detail. 
 "It doesn't work!" he says to me. 
 I slowed the schedule down to 200 dph and the detail filled fine, 
 because the investment got hot enough.
  He still insisted that "it didn't work!" 
  and there was no reason he couldn't go up 500 dph. 
 
 Your schedule would not work with this vessel form I cast on this post. 
 Guaranteed. 
 It would crack the investment up, 
 too fast for the thickness and the temp of the investment would be 
 lagging way behind the temp of the kiln, 
 thus shortening your actual process temp time. 
 
 Make sure the investment gets hot enough, the glass will follow. 
 
 Hang in there, it takes a while to see all the variables of glass casting. 
 I'm still finding new ones. 
 When you've screwed up dozens of castings and figured out why 
 and can correct them then you've taken the first steps on a 1000 mile journey. 
 
 Hugh

glassburl



Joined: 23 Jun 2005
Posts: 550
Location: Port Orford, OR
New post  Posted: Sun Jun 17, 2007 1:43 am

_________________
Always remember that you're unique. Just like everyone else.